Welcome back.
In this video we'll learn how to add some more functionality to our force directed graph by making the
node's Dragonball.
This is a nice visual enhancement that allows the user to move the nodes around and see the forces update
in real time in order to do this.
Two things have to happen.
First we need to be able to implement some sort of drag functionality on our elements.
Second when a node is being dragged it needs to be able to ignore all of the other forces acting on
it and pay attention only to the user dragging it around.
Fortunately D-3 allows us to do both of these things without too much trouble.
Here are some links to our code where we left it off for the dragging D-3 comes packets with support
for dragging behavior the A D three dot drag.
This method allows for driving behavior on a given D-3 selection and is invoked in the same way that
axes are invoked by using the call method on the selection D-3 dot drag exposes three different types
of dragging events start drag and end.
As you can probably guess.
Start Fires when someone begins to drag an element drag fires repeatedly as someone is dragging and
end fires when someone has stopped to see these events in action.
Let me move to my node selection variable and at the bottom called the three dot drag I'll attach three
callbacks in the air drag start on start drag on drag and drag end on end.
For now these functions won't do very much drag start on a log one message.
Drag will log another and drag and log a third saving refresh as you can see when I mouse over one of
my nodes.
Nothing happens but if I click on my mouse while I'm over a node the start event fires then as I move
my mouse around the drag event continues to fire.
Finally when I mouse up the end event fires great.
This is exactly the structure we'll need.
Now we just need to update our callbacks so that they do what we want them to do.
First we'd like to be able to move our nodes independently of the simulation forces to do this.
We can set special properties on the node f x and f y when you have a node in a for simulation.
The x property will fix that nodes exposition at whatever value you specify.
Similarly f y will fix that knows why position in particular.
This means that the node will stay put and will not be influenced by forces acting on it to remove the
fixed position.
You can set these two properties to no in order to drag our nodes.
We'll need to set f x and f y properties on them.
For example when we start dragging.
We can set these properties equal to the current position values for the node.
As for dragging we can update these properties based on the event and when we're finished we can set
these properties back to No.
Let's see if this works.
When I refresh the page it looks like I can add these nodes around great weight.
It stopped working based on the messages being logged to the con. I'm still triggering the dragons but
now nothing's happening.
So what's going on.
To understand this behavior we need to dig a little deeper into how the simulation works forces aren't
applied continuously.
Otherwise most charts would never stabilize.
Instead when the simulation starts there is a constant called an alpha value that affects the strength
of every force in the simulation.
After every tick of the simulation the alpha value decays until it reaches some minimal value at which
point the simulation stops.
In the meantime since the alpha value is shrinking the forces also weaken over time.
This process is sometimes referred to as a cooling of the simulation D-3 exposes several methods for
manipulating the alpha value.
These include Alpha which can either get the current Alpha value or set a new alpha value alpha men
which either gets or sets the smallest value alpha can be once Alpha dips below this value.
The simulation stops by default.
This value is zero point zero 0 1 alpha decay which gets or sets the decay rate for the alpha value.
During each tick this defaults to approximately zero point zero 7:58 Alpha target which gets since a
new target value that Alpha will head towards after every take this defaults to zero the easiest way
to see the alpha value change is by Konsole logging it inside of the tick event handler.
Let's do that now as you can see while Alpha is changing.
The simulation works fine but once it goes below the minimum we can no longer drag the nodes around.
We can also begin to appreciate the value of this alpha parameter.
If we forcibly set it equal to one inside of the Candler in this case it takes these nodes a relatively
long time to find a stable arrangement and there is no guarantee that such an arrangement would even
exist for a more complicated set of nodes.
In order to get our dragging functionality working well need to manipulate the alpha value we have a
couple of options.
One is to forcibly set a new alpha value inside of the drag of X and then restart the simulation.
You can choose any output values greater than the men but stick to values between 0 and 1 if your alpha
value is too big.
Your forces will be too strong in the simulation can break.
If we save and refresh the page you can see that this approach seems to work.
Another option is to manipulate the outflow target rather than automatically updating the alpha value.
This will cause the simulation to warm back up as Alpha tries to increase from 0 to whatever new target
you've set.
For this approach we won't touch the drag callback but will have some modified drag start to drag and
in drag start.
We'll need to set a new target and restart the simulation then in drag and we need to set the target
back to zero.
Otherwise Alpha will never decay below its minimum let's save and refresh again as you can see our dragging
feature now seems to be working.
Great.
There's plenty more to learn if you want to build force directed graphs but we've built a pretty solid
conceptual foundation in the next video.
We'll take a look at a real world data set and try to create a force directed graph out of it.
I'll see you there.